When stable economies have high interest rates,
the value of their currencies goes up
relative to other currencies.
And we really need to understand this phenomena
when we analyze companies that are doing business
in other countries.
And generally speaking, the US dollar strengthens
when the US government raises interest rates
or when other countries see the United States
as a relative flight-to-quality in terms of,
in times of extreme uncertainty,
and a great website for understanding
not just currency rates,
but also inflation levels is xe.com.
If we click on CAD for Canadian dollars, we can see
that the inflation rate in Canada is 1.6%,
which means prices rise by about 1.6% every year in Canada,
and just above that figure, just above that figure,
we can see the exchange for Canadian dollars
in other major currencies.
We see here that one Canadian dollar
buys you about 73 US cents,
and one US dollar buys $1.37 in Canadian dollars.
And we can also see that the nickname
for the Canadian dollar is the loonie,
as a loonie is on the Canadian one-dollar coin.
We also see here that the interest rate in Canada,
which is called the Central Bank Rate is 0.5%
as of this recording, and we can link
to the Bank of Canada from this website shown here
which is the source of the interest rates
and the inflation statistics.
Okay, let's go back to xe.com now.
Let's go back to that website.
And we can see charts of the historical moves of currencies.
And every company that we're investing in
does a lot of business in other countries.
We gotta know.
We gotta know their currency exchange rate,
and if we're investing in US dollars,
or US dollar done in stocks or other countries
on your investment portfolio management system,
we have know what our exchange rate is if applicable.
Now we know that we can go to our Settings button here
in order to change the foreign currency exchange rate.
And economies that are more dependent than others
on selling commodities or other natural resources
like oil include Canada, Australia, and Brazil,
and there's others too.
As such, most of the time, when oil prices are very high,
so too are the valuations of the three respective currencies
I just mentioned relative to other currencies.
Why?
This example here explains why.
If the price of most major commodities are very, very high,
then if China wants to buy iron ore from Australia
for example to make steel,
then China would have to buy more Australian dollars
in order to buy Australian iron ore in Australia
which drives the price of the Australian dollar up a lot.
And the converse is true of course
if commodity prices are dropping,
you know, as China would need to exchange fewer
or less money, I should say, for fewer Australian dollars
in order to buy Australian commodities, okay?
And I also like to use this website
for looking at historical exchange rate charts, okay.
It's forexfactory.com.
And this website is incredibly detailed.
If we look at the historical chart of the Canadian dollar
relative to the US dollar, we see that the Canadian dollar
as at par with the US dollar, meaning it was valued at
$1 relative to each dollar in 2008, partially because
the price of oil in 2008 was over $100 per barrel
at one point.
Okay, so so far, we have only discussed currencies
that are floating currencies, right,
meaning ones that increase or decrease
relative to other currencies in the free market,
okay, the open market, right,
and in governments though that do a lot of business
with one or a few larger countries often fix
their currencies, also called peg.
They peg their currency to another one
so that the value of their currency never changes
relative to the larger country's currency.
That way, these countries maintain their fixed
or pegged, same thing, pegged currency, right, through,
and the way they do it is they do it
through massive open-market purchases
or sales of their own currency
through that country's reserves of foreign currency, okay?
And when demand is too high for their currencies,
these governments buy bonds
so as to increase the amount of supply of their own currency
in the markets, right, and also to maintain
their fixed currency value.
Recall the higher the supply of currency,
the lower the interest rate is for that currency,
and this is artificial.
It can may be maintained for many, many years
as long as the underlying currency reserves are plentiful,
okay, and the second that a country that has a
fixed reserve rate, if they run out of foreign currency
to be able to buy or artificially change
their own currency value, if they run out of that money,
then what's gonna happen is they can't fix that rate anymore
and it automatically floats and it's disastrous,
and I'm not gonna go there.
But if you have questions, ask me offline.
George Torres made a lot of money
breaking the British pound into Thai baht.
Off topic, though.
Okay, the following countries here have their currencies
pegged to the US dollar or other relatively stable
and stronger economies or stronger economies I should say,
as these countries might do a lot of business
with the United States or these other countries,
and hence, rather than dealing with uncertainty,
with FX or foreign exchange rate price changes,
their currencies remain at the same level at all times
relative to the United States dollar or other currencies.
We know that high inflation leads to higher interest rates
and I think it's important to discuss
great economic entities or events
that are somewhat deflationary, okay?
So there is this epic speech that Ronald Reagan,
who's my favorite president ever,
he gave this speech at the Berlin wall in 1989,
and I'll show you a clip of it right here
and then I'll discuss why this important.
(audience applauds)
Mr. Gorbachev, tear down this wall.
(audience cheers)
Interestingly enough, when Reagan made that speech,
his speechwriter was so mad with him
because he went off-script and said, "Tear down this wall"
bur when the wall fell, the Berlin Wall of course,
what happened was you had all of this incredibly educated
Eastern-European labor moving west,
and one of the biggest inputs into prices
of anything you buy is the price of labor.
And so you had much lower-priced smart labor moving west,
and that kept interest rates very low in the late '80s
and in the '90s, right, for years.
It was because of that, because of that,
which is pretty cool.
And I guess a more recent event that's similar to this
is Amazon Web Services, and if you're interested in this,
you can read an article I wrote here in Venture Beat on this
but I believe that Amazon Web Services
is this generation's Berlin Wall teardown event.
A bit off-topic, but anyway, here's the link here
if you want to read up on this
and if you have questions, as always, please let me know.
Thanks.